# Recovery

25 November, 2022

I'm trying to recover this project, because it's something I want for daily journaling. There, I've solved the problem of not having a use case.

First up: boot the Pi4 to see where it's at. First blush:

1. On boot it tries to run a `sharpikeebo_lcd.service`, which fails.
2. The resolution is very low (probably matches that of the sharp display)
3. the raspberry image is showing at the top of the terminal, so I have 50 x 20 characters on the screen.

## Update & Upgrade

First step of blowing the dust off any project is to upgrade packages.

```sh
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get upgrade
```

## Command line settings

[discovered by Daisy keyboard can't type /?]

Can I turn off that pesky raspberry logo?

```sh
sudo nano /boot/cmdline.txt
```

and prepend the line with "logo.nologo"

## what is up with the `sharpikeebo_lcd.service`?

Run [the installation](https://github.com/hra1129/ShaRPIKeebo-customize-for-japanese/blob/main/sharp_memory_display/readme_en.txt) again?

1. I notice the guide mentions "If you have this sharp_terminal resident as a service at startup...". Is `sharp_terminal` the same as `sharpikeebo_lcd`? Probably. There's only one mention of the former in the repo, and a quick internet search shows nothing.
2. apt-get update and upgrade. Doing them again I guess. Why do I need to upgrade chromium-browser?? Maybe this is a GUI install of Raspi but I turned off the GUI? Should reflash probably...
3. Finished the rest of hra1129's installation instructions. It didn't mention
in the guide but I also had to `chmod a+x /usr/local/bin/sharpikeebo_lcd`. When I reloaded the systemctl daemon and started the sharpikeebo service, I didn't get an error at least!

Next I need to remember how to wire the display!

## wiring the display

I had a breadboard kicking around with wires already placed, which go thusly:

GND -> "GND"
3V3 -> "VIN"
MOSI -> "DI"
SCLK -> "CLK"

GPIO16 -> "CS"
GPIO18 -> "DISP"
GPIO22 -> "EIN"

The `sharp_memory_display_driver.c` file mentions:

```c
#define CS				16
#define DISPON			18
#define EXTCOMIN		22
```

which seems fine.

Do I have continuity? No! MOSI was disconnected.
Do I need to use "3v3" instead of "VIN" on the breakout?

When I boot now, the display shows mostly-black static. Typing seems to make no difference. 3V3 being connected to "VIN" or "3V3" seems to make no difference. The service is running. I wonder if I can get logs from it...

Are the pins correct? I guess it's time to try to parse through this code, huh.
That or trace some wires on the sharpikeebo PCB from GPIO pads to memory ribbon...hmmmm. ok the trace is on!

Starting with the Adafruit breakout board, I can map what ribbon trace turns into what pin. From the rear of the board, I'm naming the ribbon R0 through R9 (left to right).

There is a chip on here, a TI 05A4J0M HC4050M G4. It's 2x8 pads, and when it's oriented to be readable the bottom row are C1-C8 and the top row are (left to right) C16-C9.

using graphviz-esque language

```dot
R0 -> disconnected
R1 -> via0
R2 -> disconnected
R3 -> C10
R4 -> capacitor? -> ground
R4 -> C12
R5 -> cluster0
R6 -> cluster0
R7 -> disconnected
R8 -> pad?
R9 -> cluster0
cluster0 -> ground
cluster0 -> cluster1
cluster1 -> ground
cluster1 -> cluster2
cluster2 -> ground
cluster2 -> "VIN (3.3-5V)"
cluster2 -> C1
C1 -> via6 -> "3V3"
ground -> "GND"
C2 -> via5
C3 -> "SCLK"
C4 -> via4
C5 -> "MOSI"
C6 -> via3
C7 -> "CS"
C8 -> ground
C9 -> diode? -> ground
C9 -> "EXTIN"
C11 -> diode? -> via1
C13 -> disconnected
C14 -> diode? -> ground
C15 -> via2
?? -> EXTMD
?? -> DISP
```

I guess that was fun-ish. Not sure what to make of that chip though. I'm pretty sure the Sharpikeebo doesn't have one. It's probably a "High-Speed CMOS Logic
Hex Buffers, Inverting and Non-Inverting".

What does the Sharpikeebo board look like? There's a spot for a chip here, silked as "U2", which the sharpikeebo diagram lists as a RFM95W-868S2, which is a "Low Power Long Range Transceiver Module".
There's also a diagram for the Sharp Display, which lists the following pins:

1. SCK
2. MOSI
3. CS
4. EXTCOMIN
5. DISPON
6. VDDA
7. VDDD
8. EXTMODE
9. GNDD
10. GNDA

VDDA and VDDD are connected to 3.3V (and ground through some caps). Based on the large pads on the board, I can guess which side of the ribbon is for GNDA and GNDD, so I have a mapping, sort of!

on the pcb, the J1 top row is where MOSI is.

```dot
R0 "SCK" -> via...
(R0 "SCK" -> RF12, because presumably the RF chip needs clock and MOSI too)
R1 "MOSI" -> MOSI
(R1 "MOSI" -> RF11)
R2 "CS" -> pin16 (GPIO23)
R3 "EXTCOMIN" -> pin22 (GPIO25)
R4 "DISPON" -> C101 100nF -> ground
R4 "DISPON" -> pin18 (GPIO24)
R5 "VDDA" -> 3V3 (next to MOSI, if it matters) 
R6 "VDDD" -> 3V3
R5, R6 -> C102 100nF -> GND
R5, R6 -> C103 1µF -> GND
R7 "EXTMODE" -> R101 0R "RPI MODE" -> +3.3V
R7 "EXTMODE" -> R106 10k -> VIN
R7 "EXTMODE" -> R107 10k -> GND
R8 "GNDD" -> ground
R9 "GNDA" -> ground
```

So what did we learn?
Pin numbers are not the same as GPIO numbers. The C code is using pin numbers, and my Pi Cobbler breakout board is showing me GPIO numbers. Time to translate!

Also, it's easy to get lost while tracing.

I could maybe try to make my own sharp breakout board, to use the code that works with ShaRPIKeebo.
Or I could stuff one of the boards I already have...

## rewiring it and trying again

GND -> "GND"
3V3 -> "VIN"
MOSI -> "DI"
SCLK -> "CLK"
pin16 (GPIO23) -> "CS"
pin18 (GPIO24) -> "DISP"
pin22 (GPIO25) -> "EIN"

holy shit that worked!
unplugging my debugging display looks like it makes the sharp display stop working though... so that's next to troubleshoot.

## How many displays do I need?

### Trial 1

7" touchscreen plugged in via ribbon cable, power and ground.
sharp plugged in via breadboard according to above wiring instructions.

T+00 power plugged in
T+21 the sharp mirrors what's on the touchscreen
T+25 command prompt

At this point I unplugged the power and ground of the touchscreen and the sharp still worked.

### Trial 2

7" touchscreen plugged in only via ribbon cable
sharp plugged in as above

T+00 `sudo reboot`
T+120 still no response

### Trial 3

7" touchscreen plugged in only via ribbon cable
sharp plugged in as above

T+00 power plugged in
T+120 still no response

I'm starting to think that the Pi can tell whether or not a display is connected (presumably via ribbon or HDMI port), and starts its frame buffer if so. Otherwise, it doesn't, thus no visual response from the Sharp.

Can I disable this optimization somehow? The guide mentioned something about turning off services to make the boot faster...or at least I can check my [boot config](https://github.com/hra1129/ShaRPIKeebo-customize-for-japanese/blob/8bff846c94760b49020fe74b6dcce30ac16745cf/sharp_memory_display/config.txt) is acceptable.

Hell yeah! So I implemented these lines of the config:

```txt
# uncomment if hdmi display is not detected and composite is being output
hdmi_force_hotplug=1
# uncomment to force a specific HDMI mode (this will force VGA)
hdmi_group=2
hdmi_mode=85
```

and hard-booted the Pi with only the Sharp display attached!
It fucken works!

Now I can build a hat board for the Pi and Sharp to plug into. And learn vim, I guess. And move forward with the keyboard and enclosure designs.
